---
title: git aliae to make you more awesome (part 1)
permalink: blog/git-aliae-1.html
layout: post
fuzzydate: May 2012
credit: Martin Kleppmann, Ryan Fitzgerald and John Mair
---

One of the amazing advantages of git is that you can create commits locally on your own
computer. I think this is one of the massively underestimated features of distributed
version control systems as it enables (at least) three hugely wonderful things:

1. You can make permanent check-points every time you get the code into a working state,
   and refer to them to when you break stuff.

2. You can save what you're working on right now, and switch to work on something else for
   a while, and then just jump right back in where you left off.

3. You can refactor the commits you make so that you end up with a string of neatly
   wrapped chunks of changes, one after the other. (aka. *[sausage making](http://sethrobertson.github.com/GitBestPractices/#sausage)*).

To be honest, point one is both the most obvious advantage and the least useful — most
editors have undo features, so this is only game changing if your machine crashes a lot
(maybe essential for Kernel developers, but not really for me).

The second point is pretty exciting however. It means you can have an infinite number of
things going on at the same time, without having to keep them all in your head. To help
me do this I've written two [git-aliae](https://github.com/ConradIrwin/git-aliae) that I use all of the time:


git-pause && git-resume
-----------------------

Let's say I'm sitting at my desk adding a password-reset dialog to the site, and suddenly
the guy across from me says: "Hey, I just noticed we're broken on IE7 again, can you fix
it?".

No problem, I just `git pause` on my current branch (`wip.password-reset`) and then
`git checkout master`. I'm now ready to go and get a cup of tea and get stuck straight
into the IE7 bug.

A few hours later, I've fixed the bug, deployed a new version of master, and am ready to
get back to working on the password-reset dialog again. I go back to the branch I was
working on with `git checkout wip.password-reset`, and then `git resume`, and all my work
is back ready for me to get stuck back in.

<aside>Under the hood: `git pause` works by creating a temporary commit on the tip of the
branch you're currently working on, and `git resume` removes the commit again. Importantly
this means that (unlike `git-stash`) you can have multiple paused branches at the same
time, and you can always find your work again.</aside>


sausage making
--------------

The third bullet point is the one I'm really wanting to rave about. If I can refactor
commits as I go, then I can make the git history look awesome. This is vitally important
to me because I'm very proud of my work as a programmer; if the guy reviewing my changes
isn't thinking "wow, this stuff is awesome", I feel sad.

There are also sound "business" reasons to ensure your history is in working order: it
makes code review easier, the `git log` output more useful for status tracking, and tracking
down regressions much less painful. Finally of course, happy developers are productive developers,
so letting me spend time being happy is good for everyone.

<aside>Seth Robertson (who I would credit with coining the phrase "sausage making") has
written more extensively about the pros cons and techniques of the practice on his very
thorough [Git Best Practices
page](http://sethrobertson.github.com/GitBestPractices/).</aside>

In order that all this refactoring of history doesn't take up too much of my time, I'd
like to introduce you to two more [git-aliae](https://github.com/ConradIrwin/git-aliae).
This is really the tip of the iceberg in terms of what git can do, but these are
definitely the commands I use most.

git-amend
---------

Going back to me having written a shiny new password-reset dialog, I notice while I'm
committing (with `git commit -v` so I can review my own diff) that I've just duplicated a
lot of logic from the main sign-up form... This triggers my refactor alert, and so after
I've finished committing the working (but lamely written) version of the password-reset
dialog, I get stuck back into the code and refactor the sign-up form and the new
password-reset dialog to share the same code.

Once the refactoring is done, I just `git amend .`, which takes all my new refactorings
and shoves them straight into the previous commit. No-one else need know that I even
considered duplicating the code, looking at the git history will make it appear as though
the beautiful new version just sprang fully-formed into my mind.

<aside>Under the hood: `git amend` is a wrapper for `git add "$@" &&` `git commit --amend`,
this means it supports the `-p` flag. It also means that you can "undo" an amendment with
normal git commands: `git reset HEAD@{1}` (do not use `--hard`).</aside>


git-uncommit
------------

Unfortunately the commit that introduces the beautiful new version is quite chunky: it
both refactors the main sign up form and adds a password reset dialog. To make this much
nicer I really want to split it into two separate commits, first refactor the sign-up form
into a reusable form; and then add a password reset dialog that uses the new reusable
code.

Thankfully, `git uncommit -p` can be used to help with this. It walks me through a nice
interactive process where I can choose which parts of the previous commit I want to keep,
and which ones I want to pretend haven't yet happened.

Once that is done I need to do two more things: firstly change the message on the commit
(which now contains only the sign-up form refactor), which I can do with `git amend`; and
secondly commit all the password-reset dialog code that's now in my working tree, which I
can do with `git commit -av` as normal.

<aside>Under the hood: `git uncommit` is a clever wrapper for `git checkout HEAD^ "$@" &&`
`git commit -CHEAD`. This means that, just like with `git amend`, if something goes wrong
you can undo a git-uncommit with `git reset HEAD@{1}` (do not use `--hard`).</aside>


installation
------------

There's nothing quite as satisfying as the feeling of a job-well-done, and fixing up my
commits like that gives me immense satisfaction. As I'm certain you'll also want to do
this, I've made these aliae available on [GitHub](https://github.com/ConradIrwin/git-aliae).

To install git aliae:
{% highlight bash%}
git clone https://github.com/ConradIrwin/git-aliae
# Add the following line to your ~/.bashrc
export PATH=$PATH:/path/to/git-aliae/bin
{% endhighlight %}

Please report bugs and feature requests to [GitHub
issues](https://github.com/ConradIrwin/git-aliae/issues).

<aside>I will award 10 points to Gryffindor if you noticed that `git uncommit` with no
arguments can be used instead of `git resume`; 20 points if you know that using *aliae* as
the plural of *alias* is an etymological disaster; and 50 points if you get in touch with
feedback :).</aside>
