---
title: "LSpace: Dynamic scope for Ruby"
permalink: blog/lspace.html
layout: post
fuzzydate: December 2012
credit: Asher, Ryan King, Ryan Fitzgerald
---

At [Rapportive](http://rapportive.com) we have one master database that's always
up-to-date, and a read slave that may be a little bit behind. Usually a database
read can use either connection, but if a user is viewing their own page we need
to use the master database. This is so that if they've just edited their
information, their edits are guaranteed to show up, even if the read slave is
lagging.

[LSpace](https://github.com/ConradIrwin/lspace) is a library designed for
holding implicit state like this. We can tell the database layer to use the
master database at the top level, and that decision will be transparently passed
down through the page loading logic:

{% highlight ruby %}
require 'lspace'
class DatabaseConnection
  def get_read_connection
    LSpace[:database] || slave_db
  end

  def self.use_master(&block)
    LSpace.with(:database => master_db) do
      block.call
    end
  end
end

DatabaseConnection.use_master do
  load_data_for_page
end
{% endhighlight %}

As you can see, `load_data_for_page` doesn't need to take an argument to tell it which
database to use. It just uses the LSpace for implicit context.

Why not just a global?
======================

In the example above I clearly could have used a global variable, though that gets a bit
messy if there are multiple threads. I could even have used a Thread-local, but LSpace is
better than Thread-locals for two reasons:

1. LSpace locals are changed only for the duration of a block. This means that
   you won't permanently clobber the value that someone else set, and that your
   value won't leak once you no-longer need it.
2. LSpace can automatically extend the notion of thread when you're using
   [eventmachine](https://github.com/eventmachine/eventmachine) or
   [celluloid](http://celluloid.io). Values in LSpace are preserved even when your code
   jumps between actors or continues after a callback.

As I'm sure the old-time-lispers are eager to point out, the first makes
LSpace an implementation of
[dynamic scoping](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynamic_scope)
and the second exists to avoid the confusion caused by the
[upwards funarg problem](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Funarg_problem#Upwards_funarg_problem).

Why is dynamic scope useful?
============================

LSpace is good for anything that needs implicit context. You'll notice that to demonstate
how it works, I did not need to show you the implementation of
`load_data_for_page`. By the same token, `load_data_for_page` doesn't need to
care which database connection it's using; it just relies on the fact that a
connection will be available when it needs one.

Let's take another example. When logging I want to ensure related log messages have the
same prefix, so I can tie them back together again:

{% highlight ruby %}
def log(str)
  puts "#{LSpace[:log_prefix]}: #{str}"
end

LSpace.with(:log_prefix => "example") do
  log "hello world"
end
# => example: hello world
{% endhighlight %}

I could have just passed `log_prefix` into the log method directly, but I chose not to in
order to keep the API clean. The benefits of this become more obvious in a larger example:

{% highlight ruby %}
def fetch(url)
  url = URI(url)
  log "Fetching #{url}"
  Net::HTTP.get(url)
end

def get_title(url)
  html = fetch(url)
  (Nokogiri::HTML(html) / 'title').to_s
end

LSpace.with(:log_prefix => "example") do
  log get_title('http://www.google.com')
end
{% endhighlight %}

If I didn't have LSpace (or thread locals) then I'd have had to pass
`log_prefix` as an argument to `get_title`. This works, but it's ugly:

{% highlight ruby %}
def get_title(url, log_prefix)
  html = fetch(url, log_prefix)
  (Nokogiri::HTML(html) / 'title').to_s
end
{% endhighlight %}

I don't just mean "it's ugly because it now takes two parameters", though that
certainly doesn't help. It's ugly because `get_title` shouldn't depend on how
`fetch` is implemented; in fact, `fetch` shouldn't even depend on how the logger
is implemented.

This tight coupling means that if I ever want to add a new `log` call to my
application, I'm going to have to change a lot of code to pass the `log_prefix`
all the way down to the logger. This is clearly bad for maintainability, as it's
adding a lot of extra work for the programmer.

Should I use LSpace?
====================

LSpace makes part of your context implicit. This is good because it reduces the
amount of boilerplate state-passing you need, but can be confusing if over-used
(`this` in Javascript is perhaps the most infamous example of the problem).

We use LSpace mostly for framework-level concerns, rather than directly for
application logic:

1. Setting a logging prefix (just like in the example above). It makes logs much
   easier to read when you can associate lines that came from the same request.
2. Being able to use a particular database connection for the duration of a
   block. When we show the user their own information, we force the code to read
   from our master database so that any changes they just made will appear.
3. Maintaining state in our metrics library to enable
   [Zipkin](http://twitter.github.com/zipkin/)-style traces of which slownesses
   are caused by which others.

Other people are using similar ideas for some really cool stuff. In particular
you should look at how the reactive programming is implemented in
[meteor.js](http://docs.meteor.com/#reactivity), or why dynamic scope is used in
[Emacs lisp](http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/emacs-paper.html#SEC18).

I'd encourage you to read the [README](https://github.com/ConradIrwin/lspace),
and see whether LSpace can work its magic for you.
