---
title: git aliae so that you never lose work (part 2)
permalink: blog/git-aliae-2.html
layout: post
credit: Sam Stokes
fuzzydate: May 2012
---

Git is an incredibly powerful tool for version control. Much of this power stems
from its underlying append-only object database which ensures that once you've
made a commit it can never be changed or unmade. This is great because it means
you can [refactor history](http://cirw.in/blog/git-aliae-1) safe in the
knowledge that you can `git reset` back to a working version if something goes
wrong.

One thing I've yearned for however is the same functionality for uncommitted
changes. Wouldn't it be great if every time git modified your working tree, it
took a backup?

Dangerous git commands
----------------------

Luckily the number of git commands that actually modify the working tree is
small, in fact there are only three commands that you'll usually come across:

1. `git checkout` (with `-f`, or with a filename)
2. `git reset --hard`
3. `git clean -f`

If you've used git for a significant length of time, and are not some kind of
super-hero, then I can guarantee that you'll have lost work with each of these.

It was after one particularly badly timed `git checkout -f` that I finally decided
that something needed to be done. While retyping out the hours of code that I'd
accidentally deleted I came up with a plan: Every time I wanted to do a
`git checkout -f` I'd first store a copy of my working tree into the object
database.  Then whenever I realise that I've thrown away the wrong changes, I
can recover them.

<aside>Under the hood: In order that the size of your repository doesn't grow
larger forever git does occasionally run a garbage collector over the object
database. This will delete unused things (like backups) which are over two weeks
old.</aside>

git-cof && git-foc
------------------

To this end I wrote `git cof`. All it does is take a backup of the working
tree, and then forward any arguments on to <nobr>`git checkout -f`</nobr>. To
facilitate undoing this, I also wrote `git foc` (the name is intentionally
evocative of the expletive I no longer need to use).

`git cof` can be used as a drop-in replacement for all uses of `git checkout`,
(excepting `-m` and `-p` because those flags are incompatible with `-f`). This
means that if you use it when changing branch, or when checking out a particular
file, you'll also get a backup of your unsaved changes.

`git foc` just automates the restore process. It finds the latest backup commit
made by `git cof`, and re-instates any changes that `git cof` removed. You do
have to be somewhat careful with `git foc` as if you make conflicting changes
between running `git cof` and `git foc`, you'll end up with a merge conflict.

Although `git foc` only allows you to restore the most recent backup, all the
other backups are also preserved for at least two weeks. If you need them back
you can `tail .git/tree_backups` and use normal git commands to reinstate
changes from those commits.

<aside>The observant reader will notice that `git stash` can be used as a
poor-man's replacement for `git cof` and `git foc`. I find it useful to separate
out the two commands so that I don't have to worry about filling up `git stash
list` with rubbish that I most likely will never need again.</aside>

git reset --keep
----------------

While I was considering writing an equivalent script to wrap `git reset --hard`
I discovered `git reset --keep`. This mode of `git reset` was added in
git version 1.7.1, and is exactly like `git reset --hard` except that it
preserves any uncommitted changes in the working tree.

Concretely that means that it makes your current branch point to the commit you
specify, and then it re-applies all of your uncommitted changes. If it can't do
this properly, then it will abort and tell you what went wrong.

This means that there's now no reason to use `git reset --hard` ever. You can
always use `git reset --keep`. In the rare cases that it aborts because you have
uncommitted changes that conflict with the reset, you can use `git cof` to throw
away your local changes in a safe way, and then retry.

<aside>If your version of git is too old, it's actually very easy to upgrade.
See [the git website](http://git-scm.com/) for details.</aside>

Preserving untracked files
--------------------------

One thing that `git cof` doesn't do is preserve files that are untracked (i.e.
you haven't yet `git add`ed them). This is for consistency with most git commands
which refuse to touch untracked files; and also to ensure that it doesn't
accidentally add a large number of useless files to your git object database.

This means that `git cof` doesn't help avoid the data-loss caused by
`git clean -f` yet. I've not implemented a solution that does and instead just
avoid using `git clean` at all. Instead I use `rm` manually as I find that
copying and pasting the list of files to remove one-by-one makes me think a
little harder about whether I actually want to delete it.

Summary
-------

Internalising three things can thus help you avoid losing most work with git:

1. Use `git cof` instead of `git checkout`
2. Use `git reset --keep` instead of `git reset --hard`
3. Use `rm` instead of `git clean -f`

I've found that these rules have saved me a considerable amount of time that
would otherwise be wasted re-writing lost code.

To install git aliae:
{% highlight bash%}
git clone https://github.com/ConradIrwin/git-aliae
# Add the following line to your ~/.bashrc
export PATH=$PATH:/path/to/git-aliae/bin
{% endhighlight %}

Please report bugs and feature requests to [GitHub
issues](https://github.com/ConradIrwin/git-aliae/issues).

<aside>If you've already installed the git aliae mentioned in [part
one](http://cirw.in/blog/git-aliae-1), you can just `git pull` to get the latest
changes. See the [README](https://github.com/ConradIrwin/git-aliae) for
more.</aside>
