---
title: adding context to a shared git repository
permalink: blog/git-aliae-3.html
layout: post
credit: Lee Mallabone
fuzzydate: June 2012
---

At [Rapportive](https://rapportive.com/) we use git extensively for its powerful
branching and merging capabilities. The workflow we use is very similar to that
[used by GitHub](http://scottchacon.com/2011/08/31/github-flow.html): everything
in master is deployed, everything else is in branches based off master. We're
also using [Heroku](https://heroku.com/)'s `git push` deployment model, so git
is the canonical source of information about which code is where.

In order to make this easier to work with we've adopted two simple conventions
to add extra context to the information already stored in git. These help us
understand what's going on in the repository quickly, which leads to fewer
mistakes when deploying, and lessens the need to interrupt other people just to
find out what they've been doing.

Commit prefixes
---------------

Not all commits are equal, and when we create one that makes a particularly
scary change we add a short, loud marker to the commit message. For example:

* `[MIG]` — This commit introduces a database migration.
* `[ENV]` — This commit requires an environment variable to be set.
* `[GEM]` — This commit adds or alters a gem dependency.
* `[TEMP]` — This commit is a hot-fix that will only be needed for a short time.

Providing everyone does this when such a commit is created, it's easy to scan
down the git log and spot which commits are likely to cause problems. This is
useful both when deploying, to ensure that you don't break everything; and also
when fetching changes from GitHub before starting to work on something new.

<aside>We try to ensure that [MIG] commits contain only database migrations, and
no code changes. This means that we can deploy database migrations with little
downtime by first pushing out only the [MIG] commit, then running the database
migration, and finally push out the code changes.</aside>

git-undeployed
--------------

The convention of prefixing works no-matter which tool you use to view git logs.
Just before deploying however, I run `git undeployed`. It shows me all the
commits that differ between production, GitHub, and my local master:

<div class="highlight"><pre style="white-space: normal;"><code clas="ruby" style="white-space: normal">
<span class="f4">/0/rapportive</span><span class="f3">[master]</span> $ git undeployed
<br/>&#42; <span class="f2">583adaf <span class="f1">Sam<span class="f4"> (prod/master) </span></span></span>[TEMP] No queueing
<br/>| * <span class="f2">7e7c8bc <span class="f1">Conrad<span class="f4"> (master) </span></span></span> Moar caching!
<br/>| * <span class="f2">88e2cf5 <span class="f1">Conrad<span class="f4"> </span></span></span>[ENV] Configure redis
<br/>|/
<br/>&#42; <span class="f2">05a2e01 <span class="f1">Martin<span class="f4"> (github/master) </span></span></span>Use .present?
</code></pre></div>

This (fictitious) output tells me quickly what I need to do in order to deploy,
namely:

1. Check with Sam to find out what's going on with the queues.
2. Push my changes to GitHub (always done before pushing to production).
3. Add the new redis configuration to the production environment.
4. Push my changes to production.

We also have an internal deploy script that wraps `git undeployed` and
`git push`, and which detects these prefixes. It then asks the user for
confirmation before letting the push go through, which can be useful when
deploying in a hurry!

<aside>Under the hood: `git undeployed` is powered by
[`git plog`](https://github.com/ConradIrwin/git-aliae/blob/master/wip/git-plog),
my `git log` wrapper. The main advantages of `git plog` are that it shows the
commit graph, uses pretty colours, and shows the first line of each commit
message.</aside>

Branch prefixes
---------------

The other convention alluded to in the introductory section is branch prefixes.
In order that we can keep track of what state everything is in, we group our
branches into meaningful categories:

* `wip.` — A feature or bugfix that someone is working on right now.
* `review.` — A feature or bugfix waiting on  a second pair of eyes before
  it gets deployed.
* `experiment.` — A cool hack being worked on, that probably won't go into
  production in the near future.
* `shelf.` — All the old useful bits of code we didn't get round to finishing,
  but don't want to throw away.

After the prefix comes a short descriptive name, so we end up with branches
called things like `wip.cache-robots-txt`, or `shelf.debug-console`.  This means
that it's really easy to see at a glance both what code branches contain, and
also what state different branches are in. The `shelf.` prefix is particularly
useful for automatically removing irrelevant branches from git's output.

git-happening
-------------

Just like commit prefixes, branch prefixes are useful no matter what tools you
are using to interact with git as they give you extra context with no need to
shell out to a different tool. That said they enable one very useful ability
which is not present in vanilla git (though it is on
[GitHub](https://github.com/blog/611-branch-lists)), and that is seeing the
current status of all your branches:

<div class="highlight"><pre style="white-space: normal;"><code clas="ruby" style="white-space: normal">
* <span class="f1">Conrad</span> (<span class="f5">master</span>)  28 hours ago
<br/>* <span class="f1">Conrad</span> (<span class="f5">review.html-escape</span>)  2 days ago
<br/>* <span class="f1">Martin</span> (<span class="f2">wip.cache-expiry</span>)  30 minutes ago
<br/>* <span class="f1">Lee</span> (<span class="f2">wip.hi-res-photos</span>)  4 hours ago
<br/>* <span class="f1">Conrad</span> (<span class="f2">wip.hover-intent</span>)  2 months ago
</code></pre></div>

This very quickly shows you who is working on what, and when they last touched
it. As it excludes shelf branches it doesn't matter that we keep a whole load of
old stuff around, because it will never show up.

It also shows you other house-keeping data about the branches. In the given
example, I need to delete the `review.html-escape` branch from GitHub, because
it has been merged into master. I'll also consider renaming `wip.hover-intent`
to `shelf.hover-intent`; because clearly no-one is working on it any more.


Installation
------------

In order to use branch prefixes and commit prefixes, you don't have to install
anything, just get into the habit. It takes very little extra time, and makes it
much easier to see what's going on in your repository at a glance.

In order to get `git happening` and `git undeployed`, and a host of other useful
[git aliae](https://github.com/ConradIrwin/git-aliae):

{% highlight bash%}
git clone https://github.com/ConradIrwin/git-aliae
# Add the following line to your ~/.bashrc
export PATH=$PATH:/path/to/git-aliae/bin
{% endhighlight %}

Please report bugs and feature requests to [GitHub
issues](https://github.com/ConradIrwin/git-aliae/issues).
