---
title: ampex — a practical use of Ruby's & operator
permalink: blog/ampex.html
layout: post
fuzzydate: May 2012
credit: Ryan Fitzgerald, Chris Gahan, and John Mair
---

Ruby is renowned for both its readability and its flexibility. The ultimate
goal of every Ruby program is to work well while appearing as simple as possible.

To achieve this as a Ruby programmer, you're encouraged to push a lot of the
fiddly bits of code deep into parts of your program where a casual reader of
the source can ignore them.

Out of the box Ruby ships with some very powerful tools to help you do this, the
most famous of which is its syntax for custom blocks. This allows you to re-use
existing fiddly code (for example iterating over a list) but to insert a little
bit of customisation (so now you can iterate over a list doubling as you go).

{% highlight ruby %}
[1, 2, 3].map{ |i| i * 2 }
=> [2, 4, 6]
{% endhighlight %}

The & operator
-----------------

Blocks are only the beginning of this ability as Ruby has the `&` operator which
can be used to "cast" any object to a block. This behaviour works out-of-the-box
on Procs, Methods, and Symbols.

You will have seen the Proc support in action a lot, because that's
how you pass `&block` from one function to the next. Method objects are rarely
used in Ruby, though sometimes inserting `.tap(&method(:puts))` is a useful way
to debug an object in the middle of an expression.

The most interesting example of `&` however is on the Symbol class. This was
ported to the core Ruby language in version 1.8.7 because it was so popular
with users of the libraries that implemented it (the [Ruby Extensions
Project](http://extensions.rubyforge.org/rdoc/index.html) and
[ActiveSupport](http://apidock.com/rails/v1.1.1/Symbol/to_proc)).

The whole purpose of using `&` with a symbol is to generate more readable code,
compare:

{% highlight ruby %}
["1", "2", "3"].map{ |string| string.to_i }
=> [1, 2, 3]
["1", "2", "3"].map(&:to_i)
=> [1, 2, 3]
{% endhighlight %}

<figure>
The version with the symbol has two benefits:

1. There are fewer punctuation characters.
2. You don't need to introduce a temporary name for a variable.
</figure>

This second point is the one that has the biggest impact on people reading your
code. The mental machinery that programmers use to track variables is
necessarily hefty, so if they don't need to invoke it so often they will find
that your code takes less effort to understand.

<aside>Under the hood: The `&` operator is actually not as 'magic' as it might
appear when you first begin using it. All it does is call `.to_proc` on the
object.  The above example works equivalently to `block = (:to_i).to_proc`,
followed by `["1", "2", "3"].map(&block)`</aside>


&X itself
---------

The [ampex](https://github.com/rapportive-oss/ampex) library takes the idea from
`&:symbol`, and adds a little more flexibility. This means that you can get all
the punctuation-free, variable-free goodness, but more often!

<figure>
A few examples of how cool this can be:

{% highlight ruby %}
# when you want to pass an argument to a method
[10, 11, 12].map(&X.to_s(16))
=> ["a", "b", "c"]
{% endhighlight %}
{% highlight ruby %}
# when you want to parse some JSON
owners = [{'name' => 'Fred', 'dog' => 'Fido'},
          {'name' => 'Ron', 'dog' => 'Rex'}];
owners.map(&X['name'])
=> ["Fred", "Ron"]
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight ruby %}
# when you want to chain some method calls
"alpha\nbeta\ngamma\n".lines.map(&X.strip.upcase)
=> ["ALPHA", "BETA", "GAMMA"]
{% endhighlight %}


</figure>This last example gives you something similar to the new
[`Enumerable::Lazy`](http://blog.railsware.com/2012/03/13/ruby-2-0-enumerablelazy/) module
added in Ruby 2.0; but without having to wait for that to be released. If you're
interested in more that ampex can help you with, the
[README](https://github.com/rapportive-oss/ampex) contains a few more examples.

<aside>While I think the benefits of this are obvious, when ampex was mentioned
in [#ruby-lang](irc://irc.freenode.net/#ruby-lang), it elicited the response
from [ZenSpider](http://irclog.whitequark.org/ruby-lang/2011-12-23#1324608192;):
"honestly... if someone used that in production on one of my systems, I'd fire
them on the spot" (Your-Mileage/Manager-May-Vary)</aside>

Installation
------------

The [ampex](https://github.com/rapportive-oss/ampex) library is distributed as a
[rubygem](https://rubygems.org/gems/ampex), so to use it, you can either install
it one-off:

{% highlight bash%}
$ gem install ampex
{% endhighlight %}

Or add it to your `Gemfile`.

{% highlight ruby %}
source :rubygems
gem 'ampex'
{% endhighlight %}

We've been using ampex in production for over a year now, and beacuse it's
written in pure Ruby, it works on Ruby 1.8.7, Ruby 1.9 and JRuby out of the
box.

Further Thinking
----------------

While ampex helps a lot, there are still cases where you need to introduce a
temporary variable unnecessarily. As mentioned above, for some of these cases
you can use `&method(:foo)`; but I find that that code makes me think even
harder than the equivalent block version.

I would really love to see something like Scala's
[underscore](http://books.google.com/books?id=MFjNhTjeQKkC&pg=PA146) in Ruby itself. There
have been a few attempts at this, mostly catalogued in Reg Braithwaite's comprehensive
guide to [Anaphora in
Ruby](https://github.com/raganwald/homoiconic/blob/master/2012/05/anaphora.md#anaphora-in-ruby-2012-edition),
for example [RubyUnderscore](https://github.com/danielribeiro/RubyUnderscore) adds it to
Ruby 1.8.7 by syntax rewriting and [this patch](https://gist.github.com/1224361) adds it
to Rubinius, but none are yet ready to actually be used.

Particularly I think it should be possible with some ingenuity to come up with
a solution that covers another 90% of the things you want to do. For example,
with pure Ruby and a little cunning, the following could be made to work:

{% highlight ruby %}
[1, 2, 3].map(&».puts(X))
{% endhighlight %}

The question, I suppose, is whether or not it can be done simply enough…
