---
title: dotgpg — easy to use storage for your production secrets
permalink: blog/dotgpg.html
layout: post
fuzzydate: May 2012
---

Where are your database passwords? your cookie encryption keys? your SSL certificates?

The most common answers are "in git" and "in Dropbox". Hopefully with a guilty
squirm and followed by an awkward "it's on my todo list"...

Storing production secrets on the internet in plain text is very tempting but it's obviously insecure. We've seen hacks via [API keys in git](http://open.bufferapp.com/buffer-has-been-hacked-here-is-whats-going-on/#update10), we've seen [Dropbox passwords leak](https://blog.dropbox.com/2012/07/security-update-new-features/).

Luckily, help is at hand!

Announcing dotgpg
-----------------

[`dotgpg`](https://github.com/ConradIrwin/dotgpg) is an easy to use tool that
lets you read and write encrypted files in your favourite text editor. It
maintains an access list so that each file can be decrypted by everyone on your
team, but no one else.

As encrypted files are still "just files" you can store them in git or Dropbox
so that they're easy to share. Obviously if you're really paranoid a USB stick
in a locked drawer might be safer, until your co-workers gang up on you...

Under the hood `dotgpg` is using the battle-tested [GnuPG](http://gnupg.org)
library. So unless someone gets access to your laptop and you chose a weak
passphrase it's highly unlikely anyone malicious can decrypt them.

What can I store in dotgpg?
---------------------------

Dotgpg was designed for storing production secrets. Things like API keys or
database passwords that your app needs to run. At [Bugsnag](https://bugsnag.com)
we use [dotenv](https://github.com/bkeepers/dotenv) in production, and store the
master copy of our `.env` file inside `dotgpg`. We then check this `dotgpg`
directory into git, so we can go back and see old versions if someone makes a
mistake.

At Rapportive we used `dotgpg`'s ancestor to share passwords for things like
Pingdom for which we all logged into the same account. We put the encrypted
files in Dropbox so that changes propogated automatically to everyone.

At LinkedIn the second version of the system was used to encrypt the SSL
certificates that my team needed. We then stored the encrypted files on USB
sticks locked in a drawer, just to be sure.

I also use it for encrypting the secrets in my personal backups. At the moment
that includes ssh keys, gem signing certificates and emergency two-factor-auth
codes. (My passwords are now in a system with a browser extension, but I used
to use gpg for those as well).


How easy is it really?
----------------------

While GPG is amazing at encrypting stuff, the user-interface leaves a lot to be
desired. With `dotgpg` I've removed as many options and operations as possible,
and boiled it down to two every-day commands.

1. `dotgpg cat` decrypts a file and pipes it to standard out.
1. `dotgpg edit` opens a file in your `$EDITOR` and re-encrypts it when you're done.

To get started is even simpler, just run `dotgpg init` to create a new
directory and then `dotgpg edit` to create files within it.

Adding collaborators is also pretty quick. They run `dotgpg key` on their
computer and then send the key to you (by Dropbox, email, whatever suits). You
then run `dotgpg add` on your computer to add them to the access list.

How secure is it?
-----------------

Secure enough for me. If you still have your Rails
[`secret_key_base`](http://edgeguides.rubyonrails.org/upgrading_ruby_on_rails.html#config-secrets-yml)
or SSL certificates on the internet unencrypted, then it's more than secure
enough for you too. The easiest way to get more secure than `dotgpg` is to
store everything on a USB stick offline, but this is too inconvenient for many
people.

That said, `dotgpg` is only designed to add an extra layer of protection if
someone gets into your git or Dropbox. If an attacker gets access to your
laptop you should probably assume that they will guess your password and
decrypt your files.

For more information see the [security](https://github.com/ConradIrwin/dotgpg#security) section of the README. If you have concerns, please [email me](mailto:me@cirw.in).

Installation
------------

Full instructions, including use without ruby, are available on the [README](https://github.com/ConradIrwin/dotgpg). But if you want to dive straight in, just

{% highlight bash %}
(sudo) gem install dotgpg
{% endhighlight %}

Please file an [issue](https://github.com/ConradIrwin/dotgpg) if you have difficulties, and feel free to [get in touch](https://twitter.com/ConradIrwin) if you need a hand!
