---
title: Tools for Go modules
permalink: blog/go-tools.html
layout: post
fuzzydate: December 2024
credit: Will Faught
---

For the last ~two years I've been
[working](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/48429) on pushing for a small
quality of life improvement for Go teams. I'm thrilled that modules can now
declare tool dependencies starting with Go 1.24:

{% highlight bash%}
# go.mod
module example.com/mod
go 1.24

tool (
  golang.org/x/tools/cmd/stringer
  ./cmd/migrate
)

require (...)
{% endhighlight %}

A common problem that development teams run into is the need to have a
consistent development environment so that little time is spent debugging "works
on my machine" kinds of issues.

For large centrally managed teams one solution is pre-imaged machines that have
executables installed correctly, but for smaller setups without dedicated
infrastructure teams or open source repos with minimal centralization this
doesn't make sense.

Many programming environments, like the node ecosystem for JavaScript, or the
cargo ecosystem for Rust have a solution: in addition to being able to depend on
libraries that will be linked into your program, you can depend on executable
‘tools' that are used as part of the software development workflow.

This functionally is used for everything: linters, code generation, database
management, deployments, etc.. For small fast moving teams this provides a
lightweight way to ensure that everyone working on a given project has access to
the right set of tools, and that as the project evolves, the tools evolve in
parallel.

Now, starting with Go1.24 you can achieve the same thing!

When you add a [tool
directive](https://go.dev/doc/modules/managing-dependencies#tools) to your
go.mod, for example `tool golang org/x/tools/cmd/stringer` everyone who
collaborates on a module can run `go tool stringer` to run the correct version
of stringer. To add a new tool declaration and the necessary dependencies, use
`go get -tool golang.org/x/tools/cmd/stringer`.

This works for tools built by other people, and also when the tool is defined
in the module itself. For example if you have a module `example.com/mod` which
contains `cmd/migrate/` You can add a `tool example.com/mod/cmd/migrate`
directive and then run `go tool migrate` . The advantage of doing this is that
these tools will show up in the list of available tools with `go tool`.

Although it's a comparatively minor change, it had some knock-on effects on the
rest of the ecosystem that were worth discussing. Most controversial was that
tools dependencies are resolved in your module graph and not their own. We
talked about making this optional, or pushing to a world where tools used their
own module graph for resolution.

* Supporting both leads to a confusing user experience, so that was ruled out as
the least good option.
* Tool authors want to be able to provide assurance about the builds they
provide; it's frustrating to get bug reports from users only to find that
they've built a version that differs in subtle ways from the original.
* Tool users want a way to quickly verify whether security advisories affect
them, and to upgrade packages without waiting for other parts of the ecosystem
to respond.

We ended up prioritizing tool users' security concerns over tool authors'
compatibility concerns. There are some secondary benefits (tools that generate
code with imports know that the versions match), but this is also consistent
with the broader go ethos: packages should not break backwards compatibility,
and when they accidentally do it is a problem that requires the community to
work together to fix.

Please give the new feature a whirl as you're testing out the Go1.24 release
candidates, and report bugs to the [Go issue tracker](https://go.dev/issues).

I hope this is able to remove a small amount of friction for you and
your collaborators!
